Food

Food

ISO Online Recipe Book

Antoinette Browne in the ISO is a great cook and has shared her recipes with the MIT community through virtual cooking lessons. You can view her collection of recipes in the
Cooking with Antoinette Online Recipe Book
; included are also several student recipes. Feel free to share a recipe from your home country by
contacting
us!

Leftovers Food app

The Too Good To Go
app
Every day, delicious, fresh food goes to waste at cafés, restaurants, hotels, shops and manufacturers – just because it hasn’t sold in time.
The Too Good To Go app lets customers buy and collect Surprise Bags of food – at a great price –
directly from businesses, to make sure good food gets eaten, not wasted.

Walking Distance Food Shopping Stores

Updated MIT Food & Grocery Map
This is a google map on where to find food/groceries near campus

Your Guide to Food at and around MIT
This website has multiple resources for finding food on and off campus, whether it’s a restaurant or a grocery store or other food resources!
MIT Graduate Student Food Resources
Provides a listing of resources and guidance on campus initiatives centered around making food options more convenient, accessible, and affordable.

GROCERY STORES

Daily Table
(Central Square)
684 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge MA 02139
Costs average of 30% less than other local supermarkets

Brother’s Market
(Specialty food market near Kendall Square)
1 Broadway
Food is pricier but convenient for the area

H Mart

(Central Square; 10 mins from Ashdown and Sid-pac)
581 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139

Target
(Central Square; 10 mins from Ashdown and Sid-pac)
564 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139

Trader Joe’s
(20 mins from Ashdown and Sid-pac)
748 Memorial Dr, Cambridge, MA 02139

Whole Foods Market
(16 mins from Ashdown and Sid-pac)
115 Prospect St, Cambridge, MA 02139

Whole Foods Market at River Street

(18 mins from Ashdown and Sid-pac)
340 River St, Cambridge, MA 02139

Grocery Shuttle at MIT

You can easily get to Target, Whole Foods Market and Trader Joe’s by using MIT Grocery Shuttles!

Trader Joe’s and Whole Foods Market

The MIT Parking and Transportation Office has been sponsoring a shuttle to transport MIT students to and from Trader Joe’s and Whole Foods Market.
More information here

Online Grocery Shopping

Amazon Fresh

Instacart

International Markets

Russian/Eastern European Food:

BAZAAR on CAMBRIDGE
424 Cambridge St. Allston, MA 02134

Indian
Food:

India Market
315 Moody St.
Waltham, MA 02453

Make sure to check out the food court in the
basement!

Hispanic,
Caribbean & African Food:

Tropical Foods (El Platanero)
450 Melnea Cass Blvd, Roxbury, MA 02119

Haymarket

Affordable
produce & other groceries

Hours:
Friday, Saturday, Sunday 8AM to 5-6 PM

If you go by subway (T):
Take the red line to Park street and then the green line to Haymarket

If you go by car:
Haymarket Garage (Parcel 7) 136 Blackstone St.

You can ask sellers to validate

your parking ticket, your parking rate will be $1 per hour; you can park for 3 hours maximum.