Free & low cost student resources

The following resources may help you save money. Each one notes whether the discounts are available to the MIT community broadly, to MIT students, or to students in general. We welcome comments or additional resources at
oge-comms@mit.edu

Transportation

Airport stuttles
. $15 fee; available by reservation around Thanksgiving, Winter, and Spring breaks.

Amtrak
. Students 17-24 receive 15% off Amtrak’s regular adult fare for bookings made one day in advance.

Bike upkeep
. There are
eight bicycle fix-it stations
on campus equipped with an air pump and basic hand tools. You can also get help at the
MIT Bike Lab

Bluebikes
bicycle rentals/bike share
. Students are eligible for a 50% discount.

Car rental
. As a member of the MIT community, you may receive discount pricing on car rentals. Visit the
Procurement site
and scroll down to “Car Rental.”
Community Pedal Power E-bike lending library
is a small collection of E-Bikes that can be lent to Cambridge community members for up to a week at a time at zero cost.

E-Bike voucher program
provides vouchers to low-and-moderate income residents across Massachusetts to assist in the purchase of an E-Bike.

Grocery shuttles
. Free shuttles will take you to Brothers Market, Market Basket, Star Market, Trader Joe’s, or Whole Foods, with several travel options during the week. Shuttles also make it easier to shop at Aldi, Cosco, and Target.

MBTA/public transit pass
. MIT subsidizes 50-70% of the cost of MBTA passes for bus, subway, commuter rail, and/or commuter boat for its students.

Zipcar
can be accessed by MIT community members at a
discounted annual fee

Food

Bleacher Bar
offers a 15% off student discount on food.
Caffè Nero
offers 20% off drinks for students using their app.
Chipotle student rewards
allow students to earn 1,000 points instantly when they join, and 12 points for every dollar spent.

Good and Cheap Cookbook (PDF)
offers easy and nutritious recipes with meals costing no more than $4/day. It’s a fantastic resource for budget-conscious individuals.
Grocery shuttles
. Free shuttles will take you to Brothers Market, Market Basket, Star Market, Trader Joe’s, or Whole Foods, with several travel options during the week. Shuttles also make it easier to shop at Aldi, Cosco, and Target.
Loretta’s Last Call
offers 50% off appetizers on Mondays through Thursdays from 2 to 7 p.m. for students showing their student IDs.
MIT Banana Lounge
has free bananas all day, every day. You can find them in 26-110.
Saloniki Greek
. Show your student ID for a free order of Greek Fries with a lunch or dinner purchase.
The Families Food Grant
is available to families who are having trouble accessing affordable, healthy food options for themselves and their families.

Health & fitness

Central Rock Climbing gym
. Members of the MIT Outdoor Club (MITOC) can get a discounted membership at the Central Rock Gym!

Meditation app
. The
Headspace meditation app
student rate remains about $10 per year.

Zesiger Center gym membership
All students who have paid the MIT Student Life Fee are automatically eligible; your membership activates after you sign the liability waiver. You can add a family member for $22/month. Group instructional programs include swimming, squash, golf, weightlifting, and special programs for kids. Group exercise classes include yoga, cycling, kickboxing and more.

Other

Backup child care
. MIT graduate students can use short-term backup child care for 15 days per fiscal year when regular child care or school arrangements for their child are disrupted.

MIT community discounts
. As a member of the MIT community, you m ay make personal purchases with several suppliers that offer discount pricing to MIT, including Cambridge/Boston hotels, national hotel chains, computers and IT peripherals, office supplies, and cell phones and service.

MIT Graduate Assistance & Information Network (GAIN)
. Available 24/7, providing confidential support for personalized services and referrals on
legal
work/career
parenting
financial
home/daily living
, and
wellness
. GAIN can research government and community resources for you, including utility subsidies & food pantries, and assist with applications. Contact 844-MIT-GAIN (844-648-4246).

Entertainment

American Repertory Theater
Same-day rush tickets may be purchased for $20 with no fees, in-person only at Loeb Drama Center. Student & under-25 tickets available for $30 plus fees.

ArtsEmerson
Up to two day-of rush tickets for $10 each, and up to two advance tickets for $20 each when purchased at the box office.
Boston Ballet
$20 cash-only rush tickets are available for select performances two hours before a show at the Citizens Opera House (one ticket per student). Not available for The Nutcracker. WIC participants may purchase $10 tickets, up to four per household (not available for The Nutcracker).

Boston Symphony Orchestra
BSO student passes available for $35; see website for performance availability and blackout dates.
Hulu
offers student plans for just $1.99/ month.

Huntington Theater Company
Student discounts available with promo code DISCOUNT.

Lyric Stage
offers $20 student tickets; purchase in person at box office.
Movies

AMC theatres
offer student discounts for certain showings in select locations.

Brattle Theater
. Discounted movie tickets for $13.

Coolidge Corner Theater
. Discounted tickets for students for showings Sundays to Thursdays. See website for special events for kids.

Spotify Premium Student
offers free access for one month, then $5.99/ month. This offer includes access to Hulu (with ads).
The official Red Sox ticket program for college students
offers tickets starting at $9.

Enrichment

4-D Theater at the Museum of Science
. MIT undergraduate and graduate students can access the 4-D theater at the Museum of Science at just $4 a ticket. In this theater, what’s on the screen is only half the fun. With effects you can feel (and even smell!) this is one giant leap beyond 3-D. After all, why should your eyes and ears have all the fun?
View current showings

Boston Children’s Museum
. All visitors can visit the Boston Children’s Museum on Sundays 1-4pm for $1/ticket. The MIT community can purchase tickets via MITAC for any day for just $9 a ticket! Please note: After receiving your MITAC ticket, reservations are recommended through
BCM’s Ticketing page
. Students with EBT cards or WIC can
purchase tickets online
for $3.

Boston University Judson B. Coit Observatory
. BU Coit Observatory Public Open Nights offer free admission for everyone with advance registration most Wednesday evenings.

Cambridge Public Libraries
provides free events and classes for children, teens, and adults.

EBT Card to Culture
allows individuals on SNAP to access free and discounted admissions to many of the Commonwealth’s museums and cultural institutions.

Harvard Museum of Natural History
. Members of the MIT community can visit all four
Harvard Museums of Science and Culture
at a discounted rate of $8. Guests under 3 are free, and admission is also free to Massachusetts residents every Sunday morning from 9:00am to 12:00pm and on Wednesdays from 3:00pm to 5:00pm year-round. Proof of residency required.

Institute of Contemporary Art
provides free admission for MIT students, faculty, and staff, and those under 18.
Reserve your timed entry ticket through the MITAC site
. The public can also enter the ICA free of charge every Thursday evening from 5 pm to 9 pm by
reserving tickets in advance

Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum
. The
Council for the Arts
supports free admission for students, faculty, and staff to the
Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum
. Use the promo code “MIT” to make a free advanced reservation
online
– be sure to bring your MIT ID with you. Guests of MIT students, faculty, and staff will need their own tickets.

MIT Museum
. Free for MIT Students, faculty, staff, alum with ID + one guest! Additional non-MIT guests under the age of 19 or with a student ID can enter for just $10.

New England Aquarium
. MIT students can reserve aquarium tickets at a discount using MITAC. Use your MITAC codes to make your reservation ahead of time. Make your reservation
online
or via phone (617-973-5206). Children under 2 enter for free.

MITAC
offers savings on a variety of other museums, performances, tours, and more around the Boston area.
MIT Open Space events calendar
is a great spot to find free events, including fitness classes, networking events, clothing swaps, and movie nights.

Museum of Fine Arts
. The MFA’s University Membership Program offers free ticketed admission to MIT undergraduate and graduate students with valid ID. Organizational members can obtain same-day general admission and special exhibition tickets by visiting a ticket desk and presenting a valid student ID on the day of their visit. Want to bring kids along? Children under 6 get in for free, and youth 7 to 17 years old enjoy a discounted $14 admission.

Shopping

DealNews
has an extensive list of deals to help students save on everything from food and clothing to electronics and entertainment.
The Spot free clothing events
at the Cambridge Public Library. Gear up with clothes, accessories, supplies, and more — all for free! First come, first serve.

Student Beans
offers student discounts on a variety of online shopping options, including fashion, tech, health & beauty, entertainment, and more.
UNiDAYS
is a free digital platform offering discounts and deals to verified students. Savings cover extensive categories from fashion, technology, travel, and food.