Discover
Apply
Afford
Visit
Help
Blogs
Open Search Form
Home Blogs
A head-and-shoulders illustration of Kano. She has medium brown skin, long brown hair and is wearing a darker yellow jacket. She has glasses and is smiling with her mouth open.
so you’re starting your first year? by Kanokwan T. '26
boy do I have unsolicited tips for you

September 2, 2023
in How to Human, How to MIT
This week, I worked as an Orientation Leader (OL) to help first year students acclimate to MIT. It was a fun, high-energy job. Every OL was assigned around 13 students, and I quite liked my crew. Throughout the week, I saw people open up more to each other and really talk. Like petals of a flower, the people of my orientation group seemed to blossom.

Wander around. MIT has a lot of funny corners, and maybe you’ll stumble upon your new favorite spot.
Hold onto your 101 Things To Do Before You Graduate List, in case you find yourself on one evening trying to think of something fun to do. I know people who’ve regretted losing theirs. The list has some really wonderful local, well-thought-out activities. Consider highlighting ones that you accomplish as you go through these four years.
Download Splitwise and Venmo, because you will be sharing costs with people at some point. I swear by Splitwise for group transactions. I use Venmo to actually process payments and Splitwise to calculate cumulative group payments.
Skim through the course catalog. No, this doesn’t mean you have to read every single page, instead get a sense of what classes are offered in each major. What sounds cool to you? What major do you tend towards? Any HASS (humanities, arts, and social sciences) classes stick out? I think casting your net wide and observing what you find yourself interested in is a good way to really figure out what you want to do. Your interests may (and probably will) evolve with time, but, regardless, this is a good tool to employ.
Try every dining hall, so that you can gauge which ones you like most and get a spacial sense of most dorms.
Make a list of clubs that you have any ounce of interest in. Join their mailing list. Drop by one of their meetings. What do you have to lose? See if it fits your vibe. I think casting your net wide during freshman year is helpful in feeling self-assured with deciding your commitments. Also, this is the time to explore, so do make use of it. Of course, exploring is a large part of life as a whole, but freshman year is especially fruitful for it.
Get your physical MIT ID. You can get them at any kiosk. I don’t understand why the institute didn’t print them by default this year (it’s been printed every year I’ve been here so far). Your phone may be glitchy or out of battery, so mobile ID would be bust. Maybe you want to tap onto the bus or subway with a CharlieCard, which is built into the handheld ID. Some businesses may only apply a student discount if they see the physical card. It’s also nice to have as a knick knack. Plenty of reasons to get one.
Think of one thing you can look forward to every morning. It can literally be anything. A cup of tea? A good stretch? Opening up the windows? On tougher days, it’s nice to have at least one thing to help get you out of bed.
Check out the gym. All students get a complimentary full gym membership (whereas it’s ~$100/month normally), so one shouldn’t take it for granted. I know I’ve felt the difference when having to pay for the gym out-of-pocket while interning abroad this past summer. You can try out swimming on the weekends with friends, walking with an incline on the treadmill, or whatever else feels good to you. If working out is a bit intimidating, the Engineer Your Health Plus Program may be a good place to start. And, maybe the gym just isn’t for you, which is chill, but at least see what’s available to you.
Set aside a weekly time to do your chores. Sometimes, time can slip by and the lingering laundry pile can grow into a monstrous one. That can be avoided.
Don’t be afraid to say no to a party. Parties will always happen. But, tonight will only happen once. Your time is precious, and if you don’t feel like going, that’s totally fine and perfectly normal. Some nights are for sipping some tea, lighting a candle, and binging your favorite show, at least I know some of mine are.
Reach out if you need help. This one sounds obvious, but you’d be surprised. In the past, I know I have certainly done a lot of mental gymnastics to get out of asking anyone for help. Here are some examples of thoughts I’ve had: If I ask for help, that’ll show that I’m weak. I won’t do it. If I ask for help, it shows I’m not doing enough. I’ll just work harder. If I ask for help, I’ll just be an annoying bother to whoever I ask. I’ll just keep it to myself. If I ask for help, it shows I’m not cut out to be at MIT. I have to prove that I can do it myself. In retrospect, the logic is kinda ironic because asking for help actually does the opposite of what these thoughts claim: asking for help is an act of strength in taking care of yourself, a means of working smarter instead of harder, and a display of being a resourceful student. The resources MIT offers didn’t just come out of thin air; they’re there for a reason. There is a person behind every piece of support—in other words, someone’s purpose to their job can simply be just helping you to succeed. You can start with asking anyone: a friend, blogger (we really do respond to our blog emails 👉🏼👈🏼), associate advisor, TA (teaching assistant), GRA (graduate resident advisor), advisor, professor, S^3 (student support services), SMHCS (student mental health and counseling services), among many other options. Please. I’m begging you. Ask. For. Help. You’ll need it. We all do.
I hope you found some nuggets of wisdom in there. Also, please don’t let this list stress you out: you don’t have to do everything at this very moment, let alone everything. Just consider them as a whole, maybe plan a few, and keep the rest that you want to try out in your back pocket for when you find time. It’s alllllllllllll going to be okay. I promise.

As you’ve probably already heard a bazillion times before, welcome to MIT. We’re so lucky to have you.

P.S. if other upperclassmen have unsolicited (well, I guess now solicited) tips to share, please drop some in the comments below!

Post Tagged
#good luck

#hope this helps

#lifeatmit
😅 ahahaha sorry not sorry⁠back to text↑
To clarify, upperclassmen can still do the exact same activities included in the program, but they just wouldn’t receive the free stuff.⁠back to text↑
scroll to the bottom of the site. we‘re classified under “Ivy Plus and BorrowDirect”⁠back to text↑
Share this post

Share by Email

About Kanokwan T. '26
What happens in Vegas, doesn’t always stay in Vegas. Sometimes, it makes its way to Cambridge—at least, I did. Hi, I’m Kano. Let’s travel around. Where should we head? Perhaps to Thailand, where my family is originally from. We can wade in the soft teal waters, indulge in the tasty delights of st…
More from Kanokwan T. '26
whimsically signed, yfnhmc (your friendly neighborhood house meeting chair)
between now and departure stands a few classes
my last semester is here AHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
one hour of musings we're so back
[liveblog] presenting at the Open Sauce maker expo! built a funky microscope with my friends
View All
MIT Admissions
At MIT Admissions, we recruit and enroll a talented and diverse class of undergraduates who will learn to use science, technology, and other areas of scholarship to serve the nation and the world in the 21st century.

Discover
About MIT
The MIT education
Life & culture
Learn more
Apply
Understanding the process
Preparing for MIT
First-year applicants
Transfer applicants
Parents & educators
Afford
Estimate your cost
Cost & affordability
How to apply for aid
Student Financial Services
Visit
Explore MIT on your own
Online info sessions
Schedule your campus visit
MIT visits you
Request a group tour
Maps, directions, parking
Help
FAQs
Contact us
Blogs
Meet the bloggers
Latest blogs
Best of the blogs
MIT Admissions, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Room E38-200, Cambridge, MA 02139 · Tel: 617.253.3400  About  Accessibility  Policies  Jobs  En Español  Instagram