Discover
Apply
Afford
Visit
Help
Blogs
Open Search Form
Home Blogs
MIT student blogger Mollie B. '06
An MIT survival guide by Mollie B. '06
July 5, 2005
in How to Human, How to MIT, How to School
This is a list I made at the end of my freshman year in the reading room of Hayden Library… one of a very short list of places where I am comfortable enough to actually fall asleep. A fifteen-minute nap in Hayden can give me enough alertness to get me through the rest of my day… plus it’s just a nice place to sit and think. So here’s my list of Things I Discovered About Myself Freshman Year…

1. There is no substitute for sleep. Caffeine is great in a pinch, but eventually the piper must be paid.
2. It really is better to get a good night’s sleep before a test than to stay up and cram. Really.
3. Shopping is therapy.
4. Naps: they’re not just for kindergarteners!
5. Food made from scratch (or close to it) tastes so much better than the stuff out of microwave boxes.
6. Videos and pizza with friends is a perfectly acceptable way to spend a Saturday night, and is often better than going out to a random frat where you know no one.
7. Trying new activities — like cheerleading — can be a great idea. Discovering skills you never knew you had is pretty cool.
8. You gotta have friends…
9. The store brand does NOT taste any different from the name brand.
10. I still don’t know how to cross streets in the city, but I do know how to get anywhere in Boston by T.
11. Like a plant, I need a certain amount of sunshine to thrive.
12. Preserving one’s mental health is a perfectly valid reason to skip class.
13. Kazaa: how do people survive without it? (*NOTE: When this list was written, the RIAA had not yet begun suing the pants off college students. My 2005 self has removed Kazaa from her computer and now uses iTunes, simply because she has no desire to lose every dollar she has.*)
14. Besides my room, the reading room at Hayden is my favorite place in all of campus. Whoever bought those comfy leather chairs gets a big gold star from me.
15. Money doesn’t grow on trees… and earning it is time-consuming.
16. On less than about four hours of sleep, the brain’s proofreading abilities go completely down the drain.
17. Very, very brilliant people sometimes make really great professors… and sometimes not.
18. Being afraid to ask for help is a very major handicap.
19. Fifteen-minute naps are better than chocolate.
20. He who takes the hardest classes, does the most psets, participates in the most extracurriculars, and gets the least sleep — WINS. By choice, I am not a participant in the competition.
21. Never, ever, ever let one class’ evaluation of you determine your worth as a person.
22. Grades are important. Sanity is way more important.
23. It’s wonderful to be perfectly content in the company of just yourself.
24. Self-confidence is crucial — but it’s not the same thing as arrogance.
25. Both the human body and the human spirit can be beaten severely without being broken.
26. Nothing is more important than getting up when you fall down.

Share this post

Share by Email

Comments are closed.

About Mollie B. '06
So for the basics. My name is Mollie, and I graduated from MIT in June 2006 with degrees in brain and cognitive sciences and biology. I'm now a PhD student at Harvard in developmental neurobiology, where I study the development of several cell types in the mammalian forebrain. While at MIT, I…
More from Mollie B. '06
One more baby blogger Or blogger baby? I don’t know, is it the same?
These are the drones you’re looking for Aerospace engineers: what do they do in their free time?
Right back where we started from You can call me Dr. Mollie.
Primer trimestre del primer año Una historia de terror, diría… pero con un final feliz.
neighborhoods we move into and come to love. What do pregnant mice, cheerleaders, and four-foot light-up tinsel giraffes have in common?
View All
MIT Admissions
At MIT Admissions, we recruit and enroll a talented and diverse class of undergraduates who will learn to use science, technology, and other areas of scholarship to serve the nation and the world in the 21st century.

Discover
About MIT
The MIT education
Life & culture
Learn more
Apply
Understanding the process
Preparing for MIT
First-year applicants
Transfer applicants
Parents & educators
Afford
Estimate your cost
Cost & affordability
How to apply for aid
Student Financial Services
Visit
Explore MIT on your own
Online info sessions
Schedule your campus visit
MIT visits you
Request a group tour
Maps, directions, parking
Help
FAQs
Contact us
Blogs
Meet the bloggers
Latest blogs
Best of the blogs
MIT Admissions, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Room E38-200, Cambridge, MA 02139 · Tel: 617.253.3400  About  Accessibility  Policies  Jobs  En Español  Instagram